Insteadof reducing inequalities,thebiases
embeddedwithin AIsystems mayscale upand enhancethem.18
Therelation between the“black box”and AIbias
Theblack boxproblem,alsoknownas algorithmicopacity,is closely related
to AIbias in thefollowing threeperspectives. Algorithmic opacity as a structural enabler of bias
Therelationship betweenthe"black box" problemandAI bias is not
merely correlational— it is structural. AIsystemsare biased becausethey
learnedandgenerates informationfrom the pastbiased materials.Because
14 Ibid n 13. 15 Ibid n 11. 16 Ibid n 11. 17 Sukanth Korkanti, ‘Detecting Bias in Legal Language Models through Data Analytics’ (Conference Paper, 2nd
International Conference on Self Sustainable Artificial Intelligence Systems 23-25 October 2024). 18 Ibid n 17 AIsystems aretrainedon historically biased legal data, theydo nothave a
wayto be examinedor corrected,which meansanyembedded bias will
continueintheiralgorithms. Therefore,it is highlyforeseeablethatsuch AI
biases mightthenemerge in otherpredictive tools,riskassessmenttools, or
evenAI-assisted tools inthe judiciary.19
Whena biasedsentencing outcome,takeJudge Bableasanexample, was
made undertheinfluence of the biasedrisk assessmentalgorithms,the
biased outcomecontinuesto be absorbedinto futuretrainingdatabase.20
Theopacity of thealgorithms ensure thatthebias continuesto be
undetected,and disadvantagedcertaingroups of people.Thereis a great
chance thatAIcould eventually amplifythe inequalitiesand biases that
alreadyexist in the society.21
The opacity barrier to proof and challenge
In an adversarial system, ensuing both parties can have opportunities to
examine and contest evidence against their interests is an important way to
achieve justice. The opacity of the algorithms undermines parties’ chances to
do so. In traditional trials, the judges’s reasoning is expressed in writing,
which can be read, examined, and questioned.22 The AI decision, on the
other hand, can not produce a believing thinking pathway for parties to
examine.23 The damage on adversarial system is particularly hazard when AI
bias reveals a racially disparate outcomes. A ProPublica’s research suggests
that the opacity of algorithms burdens parties from learning how biases were
generated, or which factors drove to the result, or whether their individual
circumstances have been evaluated fairly.24 The defendant has limited power
nor information to challenge the AI decision, which is a sever impairment of
individual'srights, and adiminishon the justiceof adversarial system. 19 Ibid n 17. 20 Ibid n 11. 21 Anca Florina Moroșteș, ‘ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN FORENSIC INVESTIGATIONS. DOCTRINAL
GAPS, FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND THE RULE OF LAW’ (2025) 36(50) Journal of Legal Studies 164, 172. 22 Ibid n 21. 23 Ibid n 21. 24 Ibid n 11.