Thesecond reasonis a complexity reason.Although theinitial purposeof AI-
assistedtoolsis to effectively helphuman resolveproblemsand achievea
moretime andcost efficientcourtenvironment, they areexpected tobe
moreexplainable.5 Thecomplexity of AI-assistedtools is beyondimagination. Explaining theAI decisionitself hasbecomea challenge evenfor the
technologists.6A technologistmay be able to explainlogicon how algorithms
work, butcan notexplainwhy AImakethis decision. Concerns on the “black box” problem
Ifthe providerusescommercialconfidentiality asa shieldto refuse
providinginternal logicof algorithms, itwill be harder forgovernmentor
relevantparties to surveilanyAI-assisted tools’s usein the judiciary.WhenAI
decision is infault,it is questionable whoshould be responsible forthefalse
decision. Therefore,theaccountability ofthe AI-assistedtools is low. Inaddition, iftrainedtechnologists have difficultiesin explaininghowAI
made thedecision, it is evenharder foruntrainedjudges to have a
convincingjudgementbased onAI decision. This may raiseproblems in
proceduralfairness.7Due tolack of transparency,the parties,especially the
defendant,has limitedabilityto challenge thevalidity of the evidence,and
thus,may losetheirchance tohave a equalhearing incourt. 4 Houston Federation of Teachers Local 2415 v Houston Independent School District (2017) 251 F Supp 3d 1168
(SD Tex), (‘Houston case’). 5 Kai-Ping Su, AI in the Judiciary & Global Policies (PowerPoint Presentation, LAWS 90339 Digital and AI
Evidence Law in Asia, University of Melbourne, 21 April 2026). 6 Ibid n1, 45. 7 Ibid n 3, 573. Whatis worse, theirchance forappealmay be impaired if theycan not
understandthe judgmentagainst them, andthe judges, onthe otherhand,
areunable to explainAIdecision becausethe reasonsabove. Accordingly,the blackboxproblems inAI decision-making arelikely to affect
thejudicial justice andindividual’s trust to thelegal system.The
accountabilityof thejudicial systemis challenged; the individual’s rightsto
theright to proceduralfairness, andrights to appeal areboth facing aserious
violation dueto non-transparency.